============================
Chapter 40: Conclusion
============================



In `Chapter 1 <../ch01>`_, we noted that computers are quite limited in what they are
able to do. We noted in particular that computers are not good at
*interpreting* data. Because so much music scholarship hinges on
interpretations, this would seem to preclude computers from being of much
use. However, as we have seen, there are some things that computers do well,
and when a skilled user intervenes to make a few crucial interpretations, the
resulting computer/human interaction can lead to pretty sophisticated
results.

The lucid use of Humdrum depends on understanding how each of the tools works
and how it is possible to connect the tools to perform particular tasks. The
power and creativity of Humdrum truly lies in the hands of the user.

As we've seen, there are two parts to Humdrum: the *Humdrum syntax* and the
*Humdrum toolkit.* The Humdrum syntax simply provides a formal framework for
representing any kind of sequential symbolic data. A number of representation
schemes are pre-defined in Humdrum, but you are free to construct your own
representations as demanded by the tasks. In several of the tutorial examples
in the previous chapters we saw various *ad hoc* representations that were
concocted as temporary or intermediate representations. You should now feel
comfortable with the possibilities of devising your own representations to
assist you in whatever task you are interested.

The *Humdrum Toolkit* is a set of inter-related software tools. These tools
manipulate text data conforming to the Humdrum syntax. If the data represents
music-related information, then we can say that the Humdrum tools manipulate
music-related information. Each Humdrum tool carries out a fairly modest
process.

By way of review, we can group the various Humdrum (and UNIX) tools according
to the type of operation. There are roughly a dozen or so classes of tasks:

-   ***Displaying things.*** The **ms** command can be used to print or
    display musical notation.
-   ***Auditing.*** MIDI sound output can be generated using the
    `midi <../../man/midi>`_ and `perform <../../man/perform>`_ commands.
-   ***Searching for things.*** When searching for things within
    specified files, appropriate commands include: `grep <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grep>`_, `egrep <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egrep#Variations>`_,
    `**yank -m**,`_ `**patt**,`_ `**pattern**,`_ `**correl**,`_ `simil <../../man/simil>`_
    and `**humdrum -v**.`_ When searching for files that meet certain
    conditions, appropriate commands include **grep -l**, **egrep -l** and
    **find**. Most of these search tools rely extensively on regular
    expressions to define patterns of characters.
-   ***Counting things.*** Appropriate commands include: `wc <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wc_(Unix)>`_, **wc
    -l**, **grep -c**, **egrep -c**, `census <../../man/census>`_ and **census -k**.
    Eliminating unnecessary or confounding information can be achieved using
    `**rid**,`_ `**extract**,`_ **grep -v**, `sed <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sed>`_ and `**humsed**.`_
-   ***Editing things.*** Manual editing may be done using any text
    editor, such as **emacs** or **vi**. Automated (or "stream") editing may
    be done using `sed <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sed>`_ and `**humsed**.`_
-   ***Editorializing.*** E.g., add an editorial footnote to a specified
    note or passage; indicate that a passage differs from the composer's
    autograph.
-   ***Transforming or translating between representations.***
    Appropriate commands include: `**cents**,`_ `**deg**,`_ `**degree**,`_
    **dur**, `**freq**,`_ `**hint**,`_ `**humsed**,`_ `**iv**,`_ `**kern**,`_
    `**mint**,`_ `**pc**,`_ `**pf**,`_ `**pitch**,`_ `**reihe**,`_
    `**semits**,`_ `**solfa**,`_ `**solfg**,`_ **text**, `**tonh**,`_
    `trans <../../man/trans>`_ and `**vox**.`_
-   ***Arithmetic transformations of representations.*** Manipulating
    numerical values can be done using `**xdelta**,`_ `**ydelta**,`_
    `recode <../../man/recode>`_ and **awk**.
-   ***Extracting or selecting information.*** Appropriate commands
    include: `**extract**,`_ `**yank**,`_ `grep <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grep>`_, `egrep <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egrep#Variations>`_, `**yank
    -m**,`_ `**thru**,`_ `**strophe**,`_ `rend <../../man/rend>`_ and **csplit**.
-   ***Linking or joining information.*** Appropriate commands include:
    `**assemble**,`_ `cat <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cat_(Unix)>`_, `**cleave**,`_ `**timebase**,`_ `**context**,`_
    `ditto <../../man/ditto>`_ and **join**.
-   ***Generating inventories of things.*** Appropriate commands include:
    **sort** and `uniq <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniq>`_. Once again, unnecessary or confounding information
    can be eliminated using `**rid**,`_ `**extract**,`_ **grep -v**, `**yank
    -m**,`_ `sed <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sed>`_ or `**humsed**.`_
-   ***Classifying things.*** Numerical values can be classified using
    `**recode**;`_ non-numerical data can be classified using `**humsed**.`_
-   ***Labelling things.*** Appropriate commands include: `**patt -t**,`_
    `**recode**,`_ `humsed <../../man/humsed>`_ and `**timebase**.`_
-   ***Comparing whether things are the same or similar.*** Appropriate
    commands include: **diff**, **diff3**, **cmp**, `correl <../../man/correl>`_ and
    `**simil**.`_
-   ***Capturing data.*** MIDI data can be input via `encode <../../man/encode>`_ and
    `**record.**`_
-   ***Trouble-shooting.*** Appropriate commands include: `**humdrum**,`_
    `**humdrum -v**,`_ `**proof**,`_ `**proof -k**,`_ `**veritas**,`_
    `midi <../../man/midi>`_ and `**perform**.`_

Not all of the existing Humdrum Tools were covered in this book. Nor were all
of the available options described for all of the tools discussed. Exploring
the *Humdrum Reference Manual* is recommended for readers interested in
continuing to develop facility with Humdrum.


Pursuing a Project with Humdrum
-------------------------------

If you have made it this far in the book, you will now have a fairly
sophisticated knowledge of Humdrum. With this background, we might review
some general principles and specific tips for making effective use of Humdrum
when pursuing some musicological project. The following seven questions
provide useful guidelines:

-   *What do I want my final output to look like?*
Do I want a count or inventory?

    ``115 instances of ...
28 instances of ...``

    Do I want to output a found pattern?

    ``pattern found in line ...
pattern not found ...``

    Do I want a comparison?

    ``file X is the same as file Y
X is similar to Y
X and Y are different``

-   *What materials are available for processing?*

    > Use **find** and `grep <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grep>`_ to locate useful materials.

-   *What materials do I need to create?*

    > Use `encode <../../man/encode>`_ to create new data. Use `humdrum <../../man/humdrum>`_ and
    `proof <../../man/proof>`_ to check the data. If necessary, define your own Humdrum
    representation for a given purpose.

-   *How do I transform my data so it is easier to process?*

    > Use `recode <../../man/recode>`_ and `humsed <../../man/humsed>`_ to classify data into various
    classes -- such as *up*, *down*, *leap*, *long*, *short*, *difficult*,
    *easy*, *clarion register*, *dominant*, etc.
>
>     Use translating/transforming commands such as `**mint**,`_
`**ydelta**,`_ `**pcset**,`_ etc to translate the data to a different
representation.

-   *What data should I eliminate?*

    > Use `**rid**,`_ `**extract**,`_ `**yank**,`_ `sed <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sed>`_,
    `**humsed**,`_ `uniq <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniq>`_, **uniq -d** and **grep -v** to eliminate
    selective materials.

-   *What data do I need to coordinate?*

    > Use `context <../../man/context>`_ to generate contextual information. Use
    `**assemble**,`_ `rend <../../man/rend>`_ and `cleave <../../man/cleave>`_ to link information
    together.

-   *How do I know my results are worthwhile?*

    > Use comparative tests whenever you can. Use `scramble <../../man/scramble>`_ -r,
    **scramble -t**, **tac** and `reihe <../../man/reihe>`_ -s to generate control groups.

